Document Jolt built-in module in 4.4 (#10526)
godotengine/godot-docs: tutorials/physics/using_jolt_physics.rst

performance and memory without realizing it.

For this reason this behavior is opt-in through the project setting
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Areas Detect Static Bodies<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/areas_detect_static_bodies>`,
with the recommendation that you set up your collision layers and masks in such a
way that only a few small :ref:`class_Area3D` are able to detect collisions with
static bodies.

Joint properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The current interfaces for the 3D joint nodes don't quite line up with the interface
of Jolt's own joints. As such, there are a number of joint properties that are not
supported, mainly ones related to configuring the joint's soft limits.

The unsupported properties are:

- PinJoint3D: ``bias``, ``damping``, ``impulse_clamp``
- HingeJoint3D: ``bias``, ``softness``, ``relaxation``
- SliderJoint3D: ``angular_\*``, ``\*_limit/softness``, ``\*_limit/restitution``, ``\*_limit/damping``
- ConeTwistJoint3D: ``bias``, ``relaxation``, ``softness``
- Generic6DOFJoint3D: ``*_limit_*/softness``, ``*_limit_*/restitution``, ``*_limit_*/damping``, ``*_limit_*/erp``

> Currently an warning is emitted if you set these properties to anything but their

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently a warning is emitted if you set these properties to anything but their
```

that lets you toggle this behavior, if you need compatibility for an existing project.

Collision margins
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt (and other similar physics engines) uses something that Jolt refers to as
"convex radius" to help improve the performance and behavior of the types of
collision detection that Jolt relies on for convex shapes. Other physics engines
(Godot included) might refer to these as "collision margins" instead. Godot exposes
these as the ``margin`` property on every Shape3D-derived class, but Godot Physics
itself does not use them for anything.

What these collision margins sometimes do in other engines (as described in Godot's
documentation) is effectively add a "shell" around the shape, slightly increasing
its size while also rounding off any edges/corners. In Jolt however, these margins
are first used to shrink the shape, and then the "shell" is applied, resulting in
edges/corners being similarly rounded off, but without increasing the size of the
shape.

To prevent having to tweak this margin property manually, since its default value

> can be problematic for smaller shapes, this module exposes a project setting called

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
can be problematic for smaller shapes, Jolt exposes a project setting called
```
This is technically not quite correct, since Jolt itself != Jolt module in Godot != Jolt extension. However, I think that for most users of Godot, there isn't really a difference between Jolt and Jolt as implemented within Godot. So except for the cases where we do need to distinguish between the module and the extension in this page, we could just say "Jolt"?

Author: I was actually thinking of going with "Jolt has a project setting" or would that still be technically incorrect?

Reviewer: I would personally prefer that we differentiate between Jolt itself and Jolt as integrated in Godot. This setting in particular is not something that Jolt itself offers, and is purely something introduced by the integration.

But yes, I realize users talk about Jolt as integrated in Godot as just "Jolt", which I find somewhat unfortunate myself, as people then start to attribute quirks or shortcomings of the integration to be shortcomings of Jolt itself, so I would rather see that we don't exacerbate that.

I don't see it being that much more verbose to just say "the Jolt module" instead.

```suggestion
can be problematic for smaller shapes, the Jolt module exposes a project setting called
```

I guess the question is whether referring to it as "the Jolt module" makes that distinction clear enough, or whether it would be better served by calling it "the Jolt integration" (or "the Jolt Physics integration", to use its canonical name).

Reviewer 2: The reasoning to distinguish Jolt and Jolt in Godot makes sense, agreed.

"the Jolt module" seems okay. But usually we don't refer to things as modules outside of contributing/compiling documentation, since it doesn't matter for users. It makes sense in this case because this page is partly for users migrating away from the extension.

"the Jolt integration" or "the Jolt Physics integration" seem better to me. It will be more future-proof after the module reaches feature parity and stability, and the section on differences to the extension is (likely) removed as no longer relevant in several minor versions.

One question though - is it okay to use more colloquial and non-specific "when using Jolt", "enable Jolt", etc, in *other* documentation pages that aren't specifically about the Jolt integration? Or should we try to enforce a "Jolt integration" or "Jolt Physics integration" phrasing where possible?

Reviewer: > One question though - is it okay to use more colloquial and non-specific "when using Jolt", "enable Jolt", etc, in _other_ documentation pages that aren't specifically about the Jolt integration? Or should we try to enforce a "Jolt integration" or "Jolt Physics integration" phrasing where possible?

I guess it might depend on the context, but in general I don't personally see any problem with calling it just "Jolt" or "Jolt Physics" in those cases.

@jrouwe I'm curious, I've tried my best to refer to the library as "Jolt Physics" as opposed to just "Jolt" ever since the integration, since that is its name after all, and is what's prominently displayed in the repository, but you yourself often refer to it as just "Jolt", so how strongly do you feel about one over the other in more "official mediums", like this kind of documentation?

Reviewer 3: I agree that it's probably best to use Jolt Physics everywhere, but I also often just type Jolt because it's shorter and I'm lazy. In any case I don't really mind if people call it Jolt.

Reviewer 2: Then probably best to try to use "Jolt Physics" when possible as a rule/guideline in the docs. But it's okay if just "Jolt" slips in. Our documentation is often a bit informal.

will by default not report contacts from collisions with other static/kinematic
bodies, for performance reasons, even when setting a non-zero max_contacts_reported.
If you have many/large kinematic bodies overlapping with complex static geometry,
such as :ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` or :ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D`, you can
end up wasting a significant amount of CPU performance and memory without realizing
it.

For this reason this behavior is opt-in through the project setting
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Generate All Kinematic Contacts<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/generate_all_kinematic_contacts>`.

Contact impulses
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Due to limitations internal to Jolt, the contact impulses provided by :ref:`PhysicsDirectBodyState3D.get_contact_impulse()<class_physicsdirectbodystate3d_method_get_contact_impulse>`
are estimated ahead of time based on things like the contact manifold and velocities
of the colliding bodies. This means that the reported impulses will only be accurate
in cases where the two bodies in question are not colliding with any other bodies.

Area3D and SoftBody3D
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> This module does not currently support any interactions between :ref:`class_SoftBody3D`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jolt does not currently support any interactions between :ref:`class_SoftBody3D`
```

and :ref:`class_Area3D`, such as overlap events, or the wind properties found on
:ref:`class_Area3D`.

WorldBoundaryShape3D
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ref:`class_WorldBoundaryShape3D`, which is meant to represent an infinite plane, is
implemented a bit differently in Jolt compared to Godot Physics. Both engines have
an upper limit for how big the effective size of this plane can be, but this size is
much smaller when using Jolt, in order to avoid precision issues.

You can configure this size using the :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Limits > World Boundary Shape Size<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/world_boundary_shape_size>`
project setting.

Notable differences to the Godot Jolt extension
-----------------------------------------------

> While this module is largely a straight port of the Godot Jolt extension, there are
> a few things that are different.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the built-in Jolt module is largely a straight port of the Godot Jolt extension,
there are a few things that are different.
```

- ``kinematics/recovery_iterations`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_iterations``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``kinematics/recovery_amount`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_amount.``
- ``queries/use_legacy_ray_casting`` has been removed.
- ``solver/position_iterations`` is now ``simulation/position_steps.``
- ``solver/velocity_iterations`` is now ``simulation/velocity_steps.``
- ``solver/position_correction`` is now ``simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``solver/active_edge_threshold`` is now ``collisions/active_edge_threshold.``
- ``solver/bounce_velocity_threshold`` is now ``simulation/bounce_velocity_threshold.``
- ``solver/contact_speculative_distance`` is now ``simulation/speculative_contact_distance.``
- ``solver/contact_allowed_penetration`` is now ``simulation/penetration_slop.``
- ``limits/max_angular_velocity`` is now stored as radians instead.
- ``limits/max_temporary_memory`` is now ``limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size.``

Joint nodes
~~~~~~~~~~~

The joint nodes that are exposed in the Godot Jolt extension (JoltPinJoint3D,

> JoltHingeJoint3D, JoltSliderJoint3D, JoltConeTwistJoint3D, and JoltGeneric6DOFJoint)
> have not been included with this module.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
JoltHingeJoint3D, JoltSliderJoint3D, JoltConeTwistJoint3D, and JoltGeneric6DOFJoint)
have not been included in the Jolt module.
```

Thread safety
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Unlike the Godot Jolt extension, this module does have thread-safety,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Unlike the Godot Jolt extension, the Jolt module does have thread-safety,
```

.. _doc_using_jolt_physics:

Using Jolt Physics
==================

Introduction
------------

> The Jolt physics engine was added as an alternative to the existing GodotPhysics3D

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Jolt physics engine was added as an alternative to the existing Godot Physics
```

physics engine in 4.4. Jolt is developed by Jorrit Rouwe with a focus on games and
VR applications. Previously it was available as a extension but is now built into
Godot.

It is important to note that the built in Jolt Physics module is considered
**not finished**, **experimental**, and **lacks feature parity** with both

> GodotPhysics3D and the Jolt Extension. Behavior may change as it is developed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Godot Physics and the Jolt Extension. Behavior may change as it is developed
```

further. Please keep that in mind when choosing what to use for your project.

The existing extension is now considered in maintenance mode. That means bug fixes
will be merged, and it will be kept compatible with new versions of Godot until
the built-in module has feature parity with the extension. The extension can be
found `here on GitHub <https://github.com/godot-jolt/godot-jolt>`_ and in Godot's asset
library.

To change the 3D physics engine to the Jolt module, set
:ref:`Project Settings > Physics > 3D > Physics Engine<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/3D/Physics_Engine>`
to ``Jolt Physics``. Once you've done that, click the **Save & Restart** button.
When the editor opens again, 3D scenes should now be using Jolt for physics.

Notable differences to Godot Physics
------------------------------------

> There are many differences between the existing GodotPhysics3D engine and Jolt.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are many differences between the Godot Physics engine and Jolt.
```

complex static geometry, such as :ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` or
:ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D`, you can end up wasting a significant amount of CPU
performance without realizing it.

For this reason this behavior is opt-in through the project setting
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Areas Detect Static Bodies<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/areas_detect_static_bodies>`,
with the recommendation that you set up your collision layers and masks in such a
way that only the relevant :ref:`class_Area3D` are able to detect collisions with
static bodies.

Joint properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The current interfaces for the 3D joint nodes don't quite line up with the interface
of Jolt's own joints. As such, there are a number of joint properties that are not
supported, mainly ones related to configuring the joint's soft limits.

The unsupported properties are:

- PinJoint3D: ``bias``, ``damping``, ``impulse_clamp``
- HingeJoint3D: ``bias``, ``softness``, ``relaxation``
- SliderJoint3D: ``angular_\*``, ``\*_limit/softness``, ``\*_limit/restitution``, ``\*_limit/damping``
- ConeTwistJoint3D: ``bias``, ``relaxation``, ``softness``

> - Generic6DOFJoint3D: ``*_limit_*/softness``, ``*_limit_*/restitution``, ``*_limit_*/damping``, ``*_limit_*/erp``

Reviewer 2: Usually I'm in favor of explicitly listing, but since there are so many (24?), in this case what you already have is fine.

Currently an error is emitted if you set these properties to anything but their
default values.

Single-body joints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can, in Godot, omit one of the joint bodies for a two-body joint and effectively
have "the world" be the other body. However, the node path that you assign your body
to (:ref:`node_a<class_Joint3D_property_node_a>` vs :ref:`node_b<class_Joint3D_property_node_b>`)
is ignored. Godot Physics will always behave as if you
assigned it to node_a, and since node_a is also what defines the frame of reference
for the joint limits, you end up with inverted limits and a potentially strange
limit shape, especially if your limits allow both linear and angular degrees of
freedom.

Jolt will behave as if you assigned the body to node_b instead, with node_a
representing "the world". There is a project setting called :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Joints > World Node<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/joints/world_node>`

> that lets you toggle this behavior, if you need compatibility for an existing project.

Reviewer 2: Formatted as code is ideal. They don't need links after the first mention. I was a bit lazy with my style suggestions overall, so I missed some cases like these.

documentation) is effectively add a "shell" around the shape, slightly increasing
its size while also rounding off any edges/corners. In Jolt however, these margins
are first used to shrink the shape, and then the "shell" is applied, resulting in
edges/corners being similarly rounded off, but without increasing the size of the
shape.

To prevent having to tweak this margin property manually, since its default value
can be problematic for smaller shapes, this module exposes a project setting called
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Collisions > Collision Margin Fraction<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/collision_margin_fraction>`
which is multiplied with the smallest axis of the shape's AABB to calculate the
actual margin. The margin property of the shape is then instead used as an upper
bound.

These margins should, for most use-cases, be more or less transparent, but can
sometimes result in odd collision normals when performing shape queries. You can
lower the above mentioned project setting to mitigate some of this, including
setting it to ``0.0``, but too small of a margin can also cause odd collision results,
so is generally not recommended.

> Baumgarte stabilization

Reviewer 2: I'm okay with removing and adding a new section during the 4.5 cycle (and cherrypicking). I'd want a second maintainer opinion on that.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> the Baumgarte stabilization Jolt uses can result in some artifacts, like piles of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Baumgarte stabilization Jolt uses can result in some artifacts, like piles of
```

> the Baumgarte stabilization Jolt uses can result in some artifacts, like piles of
> bodies not separating as quickly as one might expect.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Baumgarte stabilization is a method to resolve penetrating bodies and push them in a state where they are just touching. In Godot Physics this works like a spring. This means that bodies can accellerate and may cause the bodies to overshoot and separate completely. With Jolt, the stabilization is only applied to the position and not to the velocity of the body. This means it cannot overshoot but it may take longer to resolve the penetration.
```

Reviewer: I can't speak to the technical details, but it seems alright to me.

I still think we need to rethink this section in general, as people who find the slower convergence to be a problem aren't likely to look for Baumgarte stabilization in the documentation, but that can be done later.

Minor spelling/grammatical notes:
- "push them in a state" -> "push them to a state"?
- "accellerate" -> "accelerate"

The strength of this stabilization can be tweaked using the project setting
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Baumgarte Stabilization Factor<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor>`.

> Setting this project setting to ``1.0`` will resolve penetration in 1 simulation
> step, resulting in a simulation that more closely resembles Godot Physics, but which
> is also more unstable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Setting this project setting to ``0.0`` will turn Baumgarte stabilization off. Setting it to ``1.0`` will resolve penetration in 1 simulation step. This is fast but often also unstable.
```

Reviewer: Is it all that useful to mention the `0.0` case? As far as I can tell it just prevents the bodies from moving at all.

Clearly the statement of "more closely resembles Godot Physics" was incorrect on my part, but I must admit I'm a bit confused by this notion that `0.0` would be what disables it, as opposed to `1.0`. I would have thought that a 100% error correction would be the default case in any solver, and that anything less is what constitutes the effect of sacrificing correctness for stability, but perhaps I've got that all wrong.

be configured using the :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Limits > Temporary Memory Buffer Size<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size>`
project setting.

Ray-Cast face index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The face_index property returned in the results of :ref:`intersect_ray()<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_intersect_ray>`
and RayCast3D will by default always be ``-1`` with Jolt. The project setting :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Queries > Enable Ray Cast Face Index<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/queries/enable_ray_cast_face_index>`
will enable them. The reason for this being that Jolt does not store these indices,
and for them to be stored per-triangle userdata must be enabled, which adds about
25% extra memory usage to the underlying Jolt implementation of :ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D`.

Kinematic RigidBody3D contacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When using Jolt, a :ref:`class_RigidBody3D` frozen with :ref:`FREEZE_MODE_KINEMATIC<class_RigidBody3D_constant_FREEZE_MODE_KINEMATIC>`
will by default not report contacts from collisions with other static/kinematic

> bodies, for performance reasons, even when setting a non-zero max_contacts_reported.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
bodies, for performance reasons, even when setting a non-zero :ref:`max_contacts_reported<class_RigidBody3D_property_max_contacts_reported>`.
```

Area3D and SoftBody3D
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This module does not currently support any interactions between :ref:`class_SoftBody3D`
and :ref:`class_Area3D`, such as overlap events, or the wind properties found on
:ref:`class_Area3D`. Support for this has been added to Jolt recently, but it is not
currently part of the built-in Jolt module.

WorldBoundaryShape3D
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ref:`class_WorldBoundaryShape3D`, which is meant to represent an infinite plane, is
implemented a bit differently in Jolt compared to Godot Physics. Both engines have
an upper limit for how big the effective size of this plane can be, but this size is
much smaller when using Jolt, in order to avoid precision issues.

You can configure this size using the :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Limits > World Boundary Shape Size<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/world_boundary_shape_size>`
project setting.

Notable differences to the Godot Jolt extension
-----------------------------------------------

While this module is largely a straight port of the Godot Jolt extension, with a lot
of cosmetic changes, there are a few things that are different.

> Project Settings

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Project settings
```
This one could go either way - "project settings" is used throughout the docs to refer to individual settings. So if capitalized with our rules (only the first word and proper nouns or node class names capitalized), "Project settings" is correct here.

"Project Settings" is also the name of a window in the editor so I guess it's fine as is too.

- ``kinematics/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal`` is now ``motion_queries/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal.``
- ``kinematics/recovery_iterations`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_iterations``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``kinematics/recovery_amount`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_amount.``
- ``queries/use_legacy_ray_casting`` has been removed.
- ``solver/position_iterations`` is now ``simulation/position_steps.``
- ``solver/velocity_iterations`` is now ``simulation/velocity_steps.``
- ``solver/position_correction`` is now ``simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``solver/active_edge_threshold`` is now ``collisions/active_edge_threshold.``
- ``solver/bounce_velocity_threshold`` is now ``simulation/bounce_velocity_threshold.``
- ``solver/contact_speculative_distance`` is now ``simulation/speculative_contact_distance.``
- ``solver/contact_allowed_penetration`` is now ``simulation/penetration_slop.``
- ``limits/max_angular_velocity`` is now stored as radians instead.
- ``limits/max_temporary_memory`` is now ``limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size.``

> Joint Nodes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Joint nodes
```

~~~~~~~~~~~

The joint nodes that are exposed in the Godot Jolt extension (JoltPinJoint3D,
JoltHingeJoint3D, JoltSliderJoint3D, JoltConeTwistJoint3D, and JoltGeneric6DOFJoint)
have not been included with this module.

> Thread Safety

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Thread safety
```

~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike the Godot Jolt extension, this module does have experimental thread-safety,
including support for the :ref:`Physics > 3D > Run On Separate Thread<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/3d/run_on_separate_thread>`

> project setting. This should be considered experimental.

Author: Going to rephrase this section a bit more since it being experimental is mentioned on the first line as well

The unsupported properties are:

- PinJoint3D: ``bias``, ``damping``, ``impulse_clamp``
- HingeJoint3D: ``bias``, ``softness``, ``relaxation``
- SliderJoint3D: ``angular_\*``, ``\*_limit/softness``, ``\*_limit/restitution``, ``\*_limit/damping``
- ConeTwistJoint3D: ``bias``, ``relaxation``, ``softness``
- Generic6DOFJoint3D: ``*_limit_*/softness``, ``*_limit_*/restitution``, ``*_limit_*/damping``, ``*_limit_*/erp``

Currently a warning is emitted if you set these properties to anything but their
default values.

Single-body joints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can, in Godot, omit one of the joint bodies for a two-body joint and effectively
have "the world" be the other body. However, the node path that you assign your body
to (:ref:`node_a<class_Joint3D_property_node_a>` vs :ref:`node_b<class_Joint3D_property_node_b>`)
is ignored. Godot Physics will always behave as if you
assigned it to ``node_a``, and since ``node_a`` is also what defines the frame of reference
for the joint limits, you end up with inverted limits and a potentially strange
limit shape, especially if your limits allow both linear and angular degrees of
freedom.

> Jolt will behave as if you assigned the body to node_b instead, with node_a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jolt will behave as if you assigned the body to ``node_b`` instead, with ``node_a``
```

that lets you toggle this behavior, if you need compatibility for an existing project.

Collision margins
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt (and other similar physics engines) uses something that Jolt refers to as
"convex radius" to help improve the performance and behavior of the types of
collision detection that Jolt relies on for convex shapes. Other physics engines
(Godot included) might refer to these as "collision margins" instead. Godot exposes
these as the ``margin`` property on every Shape3D-derived class, but Godot Physics
itself does not use them for anything.

What these collision margins sometimes do in other engines (as described in Godot's
documentation) is effectively add a "shell" around the shape, slightly increasing
its size while also rounding off any edges/corners. In Jolt however, these margins
are first used to shrink the shape, and then the "shell" is applied, resulting in
edges/corners being similarly rounded off, but without increasing the size of the
shape.

To prevent having to tweak this margin property manually, since its default value

> can be problematic for smaller shapes, the Jolt Module exposes a project setting

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be problematic for smaller shapes, the Jolt module exposes a project setting
```

.. _doc_using_jolt_physics:

Using Jolt Physics
==================

> Overview
> --------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Introduction
------------
```
"Overview" isn't wrong but "Introduction" is more commonly used 🤷‍♀️

The Jolt physics engine was added as an alternative to the existing GodotPhysics3D
physics engine in 4.4. Jolt is developed by Jorrit Rouwe with a focus on games and
VR applications. Previously it was available as a extension but is now built into
Godot.

It is important to note that the built in Jolt Physics module is considered

> **not finished**, **experimental**, and **lacks feature partiy** with both

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**not finished**, **experimental**, and **lacks feature parity** with both
```

> GodotPhysics3D, and the Jolt Extension. Behavior may change as it is developed
> further, please keep that in mind when choosing what to use for your project. A
> roadmap of this module can be found at the bottom of this page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
GodotPhysics3D and the Jolt Extension. Behavior may change as it is developed
further. Please keep that in mind when choosing what to use for your project.
```

The existing extension is now considered in maintenance mode. That means bug fixes
will be merged, and it will be kept compatible with new versions of Godot until
the built-in module has feature parity with the extension. The extension can be
found `here on GitHub <https://github.com/godot-jolt/godot-jolt>`_ and in Godot's asset
library.

> To change the 3D physics engine to the Jolt module go to
> :ref:`**Project Settings > Physics > 3D > Physics Engine**<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/3D/Physics_Engine>`
> and select ``Jolt Physics`` from the dropdown menu. Once you've done that click the
> ``Save & Restart`` button, when the editor opens again 3D scenes should now be using
> Jolt for physics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To change the 3D physics engine to the Jolt module, set
:ref:`Project Settings > Physics > 3D > Physics Engine<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/3D/Physics_Engine>`
to ``Jolt Physics``. Once you've done that, click the **Save & Restart** button.
When the editor opens again, 3D scenes should now be using Jolt for physics.
```

Notable differences to Godot Physics
------------------------------------

There are many differences between the existing GodotPhysics3D engine and Jolt.

Area3D and static bodies
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
When using Jolt, :ref:`class_Area3D` will not detect overlaps with :ref:`class_StaticBody3D`
(nor a :ref:`class_RigidBody3D` frozen with ``FREEZE_MODE_STATIC``) by default, for
performance reasons. If you have many/large :ref:`class_Area3D` overlapping with
complex static geometry, such as :ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` or
:ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D`, you can end up wasting a significant amount of CPU
performance without realizing it.

For this reason this behavior is opt-in through the project setting

> :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/areas_detect_static_bodies<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/areas_detect_static_bodies>`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Areas Detect Static Bodies<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/areas_detect_static_bodies>`,
```

> with the recommendation that you set up your collision layers/masks in such a way that only

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with the recommendation that you set up your collision layers and masks in such a way that only
```

the relevant :ref:`class_Area3D` are able to detect collisions with static bodies.

Joint properties
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The current interfaces for the 3D joint nodes don't quite line up with the interface
of Jolt's own joints. As such, there are a number of joint properties that are not
supported, mainly ones related to configuring the joint's soft limits.

The unsupported properties are:

- PinJoint3D: ``bias``, ``damping``, ``impulse_clamp``
- HingeJoint3D: ``bias``, ``softness``, ``relaxation``
- SliderJoint3D: ``angular_\*``, ``\*_limit/softness``, ``\*_limit/restitution``, ``\*_limit/damping``
- ConeTwistJoint3D: ``bias``, ``relaxation``, ``softness``
- Generic6DOFJoint3D: ``*_limit_*/softness``, ``*_limit_*/restitution``, ``*_limit_*/damping``, ``*_limit_*/erp``

Currently an error is emitted if you set these properties to anything but their
default values.

Single-body joints
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You can, in Godot, omit one of the joint bodies for a two-body joint and effectively
have "the world" be the other body. However, the node path that you assign your body

> to (node_a vs node_b) is ignored. Godot Physics will always behave as if you

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to (:ref:`node_a<class_Joint3D_property_node_a>` vs
:ref:`node_b<class_Joint3D_property_node_b>`) is ignored.
Godot Physics will always behave as if you
```

assigned it to node_a, and since node_a is also what defines the frame of reference
for the joint limits, you end up with inverted limits and a potentially strange
limit shape, especially if your limits allow both linear and angular degrees of
freedom.

Jolt will behave as if you assigned the body to node_b instead, with node_a

> representing "the world". There is a project setting called :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/joints/world_node<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/joints/world_node>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
representing "the world". There is a project setting called :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Joints > World Node<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/joints/world_node>`
```

that lets you toggle this behavior, if you need compatibility for an existing project.

Collision margins
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt (and other similar physics engines) uses something that Jolt refers to as
"convex radius" to help improve the performance and behavior of the types of
collision detection that Jolt relies on for convex shapes. Other physics engines

> (Godot included) might refer to these as "collision margins" instead. Godot exposes
> these as the margin property on every Shape3D-derived class, as a leftover from the
> Bullet integration in Godot 3, but Godot Physics itself does not use them for
> anything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(Godot included) might refer to these as "collision margins" instead. Godot exposes
these as the ``margin`` property on every Shape3D-derived class, but Godot Physics
itself does not use them for anything.
```
Unsure if the historical trivia is relevant for a docs page (rather than a PR)

What these collision margins sometimes do in other engines (as described in Godot's
documentation) is effectively add a "shell" around the shape, slightly increasing
its size while also rounding off any edges/corners. In Jolt however, these margins
are first used to shrink the shape, and then the "shell" is applied, resulting in
edges/corners being similarly rounded off, but without increasing the size of the
shape.

To prevent having to tweak this margin property manually, since its default value
can be problematic for smaller shapes, this module exposes a project setting called

> :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/collision_margin_fraction<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/collision_margin_fraction>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Collisions > Collision Margin Fraction<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/collision_margin_fraction>`
```

which is multiplied with the smallest axis of the shape's AABB to calculate the
actual margin. The margin property of the shape is then instead used as an upper
bound.

These margins should, for most use-cases, be more or less transparent, but can
sometimes result in odd collision normals when performing shape queries. You can
lower the above mentioned project setting to mitigate some of this, including

> setting it to ``0``, but too small of a margin can also cause odd collision results,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
setting it to ``0.0``, but too small of a margin can also cause odd collision results,
```
For floats

so is generally not recommended.

Baumgarte stabilization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> the baumgarte stabilization jolt uses can result in some artifacts, like piles of

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Baumgarte stabilization Jolt uses can result in some artifacts, like piles of
```

bodies not separating as quickly as one might expect.

The strength of this stabilization can be tweaked using the project setting

> :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Baumgarte Stabilization Factor<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor>`.
```

Setting this project setting to ``1.0`` will resolve penetration in 1 simulation
step, resulting in a simulation that more closely resembles Godot Physics, but which
is also more unstable.

Ghost collisions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt employs two techniques to mitigate ghost collisions, meaning collisions with
internal edges of shapes/bodies.

The first technique, called "active edge detection", marks edges of triangles in
:ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` or :ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D` as either "active" or "inactive", based on
the angle to the neighboring triangle. When a collision happens with an inactive
edge the collision normal will be replaced with the triangle's normal instead, to
lessen the effect of ghost collisions.

The angle threshold for this active edge detection is configurable through the

> project setting :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/active_edge_threshold<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/active_edge_threshold>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project setting :ref:`Physics >Jolt Physics 3D > Collisions > Active Edge Threshold<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/active_edge_threshold>`.
```

The second technique, called "enhanced internal edge removal", instead adds runtime
checks to detect whether an edge is active or inactive, based on the contact points
of the two bodies. This has the benefit of applying not only to collisions with
:ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` and :ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D`, but also edges between any shapes within
the same body.

Enhanced internal edge removal can be toggled on and off for the various contexts to

> which it's applied, using the ``physics/jolt_physics_3d/*/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal``
> project settings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
which it's applied, using the
:ref:`Physics >Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Use Enhanced Internal Edge Removal<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal>`,
project setting, and the similar settings for :ref:`queries<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/queries/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal>` and :ref:`motion queries<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/motion_queries/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal>`.
```

Memory usage
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt uses a stack allocator for temporary allocations within its simulation step.
This stack allocator requires allocating a set amount of memory up front, which can

> be configured using the :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be configured using the :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Limits > Temporary Memory Buffer Size<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size>`
```

project setting.

> Jolt also makes use of aligned allocations for some of its memory usage, which it
> acquires through function pointers that the implementer assigns. Aligned allocations
> were recently added to Godot in the form of ``Memory::alloc_aligned_static``,
> ``Memory::realloc_aligned_static``, and ``Memory::free_aligned_static``, which have all been
> hooked up to Jolt. However, these aligned allocation functions don't currently touch
> ``Memory::mem_usage``, which means that some of Jolt's memory won't be tracked, and thus
> the performance monitors in Godot won't be accurate.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
This seems mostly irrelevant to the end user, and touches on Godot internals in a way that we don't do outside of the contributing section

Ray-Cast face index
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The face_index property returned in the results of intersect_ray and RayCast3D will
> by default always be ``-1`` with Jolt, the project setting :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/queries/enable_ray_cast_face_index<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/queries/enable_ray_cast_face_index>`
> will enable them. The reason for this being that Jolt does not store these indices,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The face_index property returned in the results of
:ref:`intersect_ray()<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_intersect_ray>` and RayCast3D will
by default always be ``-1`` with Jolt. The project setting :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Queries > Enable Ray Cast Face Index<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/queries/enable_ray_cast_face_index>`
will enable them. The reason for this being that Jolt does not store these indices,
```

and for them to be stored per-triangle userdata must be enabled, which adds about
25% extra memory usage to the underlying Jolt implementation of :ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D`.

Kinematic RigidBody3D contacts
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When using Jolt, a :ref:`class_RigidBody3D` frozen with ``FREEZE_MODE_KINEMATIC`` will by default not

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When using Jolt, a :ref:`class_RigidBody3D` frozen with
:ref:`FREEZE_MODE_KINEMATIC<class_RigidBody3D_constant_FREEZE_MODE_KINEMATIC>`
will by default not
```

report contacts from collisions with other static/kinematic bodies, for performance
reasons, even when setting a non-zero max_contacts_reported. If you have many/large
kinematic bodies overlapping with complex static geometry, such as :ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D`
or :ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D`, you can end up wasting a significant amount of CPU
performance without realizing it.

For this reason this behavior is opt-in through the project setting

> :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/generate_all_kinematic_contacts<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/generate_all_kinematic_contacts>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Simulation > Generate All Kinematic Contacts<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/generate_all_kinematic_contacts>`.
```

Contact impulses
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt is not able to provide any impulse as part of its contact data, due to how it
orders its simulation step, and instead provides a helper function for estimating
what the impulse would be based on various parameters. While this is fine for most
use cases, like emitting a sound based on how hard something collided, it won't be
accurate if a body is colliding with multiple bodies during a simulation step.

Area3D and SoftBody3D
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This module does not currently support any interactions between :ref:`class_SoftBody3D`
and :ref:`class_Area3D`, such as overlap events, or the wind properties found on
:ref:`class_Area3D`. Support for this has been added to Jolt recently, but it is not
currently part of the built-in Jolt module.

WorldBoundaryShape3D
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

:ref:`class_WorldBoundaryShape3D`, which is meant to represent an infinite plane, is
implemented a bit differently in Jolt compared to Godot Physics. Both engines have
an upper limit for how big the effective size of this plane can be, but this size is
much smaller when using Jolt, in order to avoid precision issues.

> You can configure this size using the :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/world_boundary_shape_size<Class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/world_boundary_shape_size>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can configure this size using the :ref:`Physics > Jolt Physics 3D > Limits > World Boundary Shape Size<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/world_boundary_shape_size>`
```

project setting.

> Notable differences to Godot Jolt
> ---------------------------------

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Notable differences to the Godot Jolt extension
-----------------------------------------------
```
To avoid confusion

- ``kinematics/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal`` is now ``motion_queries/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal.``
- ``kinematics/recovery_iterations`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_iterations``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``kinematics/recovery_amount`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_amount.``
- ``queries/use_legacy_ray_casting`` has been removed.
- ``solver/position_iterations`` is now ``simulation/position_steps.``
- ``solver/velocity_iterations`` is now ``simulation/velocity_steps.``
- ``solver/position_correction`` is now ``simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``solver/active_edge_threshold`` is now ``collisions/active_edge_threshold.``
- ``solver/bounce_velocity_threshold`` is now ``simulation/bounce_velocity_threshold.``
- ``solver/contact_speculative_distance`` is now ``simulation/speculative_contact_distance.``
- ``solver/contact_allowed_penetration`` is now ``simulation/penetration_slop.``
- ``limits/max_angular_velocity`` is now stored as radians instead.
- ``limits/max_temporary_memory`` is now ``limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size.``

> There might be some discussion to be had with regards to migrating the settings
> values for projects who have previously been relying on the extension.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```
Not relevant for docs.

Joint Nodes
~~~~~~~~~~~

The joint nodes that are exposed in the Godot Jolt extension (JoltPinJoint3D,
JoltHingeJoint3D, JoltSliderJoint3D, JoltConeTwistJoint3D, and JoltGeneric6DOFJoint)
have not been included with this module.

Thread Safety
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike the Godot Jolt extension, this module does have experimental thread-safety,

> including support for the :ref:`physics/3d/run_on_separate_thread<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/3d/run_on_separate_thread>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
including support for the :ref:`Physics > 3D > Run On Separate Thread<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/3d/run_on_separate_thread>`
```

> project setting. This is achieved by utilizing the same wrapper server that's used
> by Godot Physics, called ``PhysicsServer3DWrapMT``, as well as introducing a mutex
> around the rebuilding of shapes, since concurrent shape-casts could otherwise
> trigger a race condition.
> 
> This has however not been tested very thoroughly, so should be considered
> experimental.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
project setting. This should be considered experimental.
```
Implementation details are not relevant for users. Don't put "hasn't been tested thoroughly" in the docs :)

benefit from the improved runtime performance as opposed to mutation performance.

To mitigate the cost of this potentially expensive rebuild, shape
changes are only ever "committed" to Jolt when the body has entered into a scene
tree. This means that you can make shape changes (including adding/removing shapes)
very quickly so long as the body isn't attached to the scene tree. However, if you
do in fact add the body to a scene tree, and then start adding/removing/changing
shapes on the body, you can end up with worse performance than Godot Physics. This
is prominently visible in the "Voxel Game" demo project, as one example.

The plan for this is to replace StaticCompoundShape with a custom compound shape
that wraps StaticCompoundShape, but which will always defer its building/committing
only until absolutely necessary, meaning either right before a simulation step or
when performing queries against the body.

Scaling shapes/bodies/queries
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Godot Physics supports scaling the transform of collision shapes, shape queries, as
well as static and kinematic bodies, meaning :ref:`class_StaticBody3D`,

> :ref:`class_CharacterBody3D`, :ref:`class_AnimatableBody3D` and frozen :ref:`class_RigidBody3D`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:ref:`class_CharacterBody3D`, :ref:`class_AnimatableBody3D`, and frozen :ref:`class_RigidBody3D`.
```

It does not however support scaling simulated/dynamic bodies, such as a non-frozen :ref:`class_RigidBody3D`,
and will effectively discard any such scaling, instead treating it as (1, 1, 1).

Jolt does however support scaling everywhere, which means that :ref:`class_RigidBody3D`
will support scaling when using Jolt, despite the warning shown on the node
currently.

Jolt also supports non-uniform scaling, so long as the inherent primitive shape is

> preserved. For example, you can scale a cylinder along its height axis but not along

Reviewer: Yeah, I was referring to scaling of one axis at a time, but that was poorly worded of me.

its other axes. You will however currently see warnings on the shape node when doing
this, due to Godot Physics not supporting this.

> Since invalid scaling can cause a number of weird artifacts, and sometimes outright

Reviewer: Right, but `MakeScaleValid` is part of the "sanitizing" mentioned in that paragraph, although I'll admit I had overlooked that `MakeScaleValid` covered the zero scaling case as well. Without it you could find yourself in trouble, if I remember correctly, although "crash the simulation" might've been me jumping the gun a bit.

(and ShapeCast3D), meaning the distances at which the cast shape was found to be
colliding and not colliding respectively, it was not viable to rely on Jolt's own
shape-casting (which uses conservative advancement) to implement :ref:`cast_motion<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_cast_motion>`.
Instead :ref:`cast_motion<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_cast_motion>` is
implemented with a binary search, similar to how Godot Physics does it.

However, in Godot Physics this binary search is hardcoded to 8 steps, which tends to
result in quite jittery output over even moderate distances. With Godot Jolt (and
consequently this module) the number of steps is dynamically calculated  based on
the cast distance, aiming for roughly millimeter precision, and then clamped between
4 and 16 steps.

This does however mean that :ref:`cast_motion<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_cast_motion>`
will technically, when using Jolt, cost more CPU performance the farther you cast
the shape.

Note that this also applies to :ref:`body_test_motion<class_PhysicsServer3D_method_body_test_motion>`, and consequently :ref:`test_move<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_test_move>`,

> :ref:`move_and_collide<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_move_and_collide>` and :ref:`move_and_slide<class_CharacterBody3D_method_move_and_slide>`.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:ref:`move_and_collide<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_move_and_collide>`, and :ref:`move_and_slide<class_CharacterBody3D_method_move_and_slide>`.
```

Baumgarte stabilization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Jolt employs a technique in its solver called Baumgarte stabilization, which is

Reviewer: > As far as I can see Godot Physics has it as well

That is news to me! I always wondered what that custom bias stuff was.

I guess all the more reason to not lead with the technique but instead present this in some other form, like addressing the discrepancy of slower convergence, through some FAQ-like thing or something.

meant to mitigate constraint drift within the simulation, resulting in a more stable
simulation. This technique can however result in some artifacts, like piles of
bodies not separating as quickly as one might expect.

The strength of this stabilization can be tweaked using the project setting
:ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor>`.
Setting this project setting to ``1.0`` will effectively disable the technique,
resulting in a simulation that more closely resembles Godot Physics, but which is
also more unstable.

Motion queries (move_and_slide, etc.)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Physics servers in Godot are meant to implement the :ref:`PhysicsServer3D.body_test_motion()<class_PhysicsServer3D_method_body_test_motion>`
method, which in turn powers methods like :ref:`PhysicsBody3D.test_move()<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_test_move>`,

> :ref:`PhysicsBody3D.move_and_collide()<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_move_and_collide>`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:ref:`PhysicsBody3D.move_and_collide()<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_move_and_collide>`,
```

and :ref:`CharacterBody3D.move_and_slide()<class_CharacterBody3D_method_move_and_slide>`,
which are largely meant to be used for moving player characters around.

:ref:`PhysicsServer3D.body_test_motion<class_PhysicsServer3D_method_body_test_motion>`
is split into three parts, the first being depenetration (called "recovery" in
Godot), the second being a shape-cast from the "recovered" position, and the third
being the actual collision check, at the "unsafe" fraction of the shape-cast.

The "recovery" step in Godot Physics is hardcoded to always do 4 iterations with 40%

> depenetration per iteration. I figured these constants might be useful to expose, so

Reviewer 3: 'I figured' is probably not what you want in the documentation.

Reviewer: See [my comment](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-docs/pull/10526#issuecomment-2664160981) below. This entire section should be removed in my opinion.

respectively.

The implementation of :ref:`PhysicsServer3D.body_test_motion()<class_PhysicsServer3D_method_body_test_motion>`
in this module also differs slightly from the Godot Physics implementation, as
replicating the Godot Physics version resulted in a prohibitive amount of ghost
collisions for :ref:`move_and_slide<class_CharacterBody3D_method_move_and_slide>`.

The discrepancies are as follows:

- There is no TEST_MOTION_MIN_CONTACT_DEPTH_FACTOR.
- There is no epsilon added to the safe margin during recovery.
- Contacts with normals that are not opposing the motion vector are discarded from
  the final collision check.

While these discrepancies do seem to result in less ghost collisions when using
Jolt, they also introduce new problems:

- :ref:`move_and_slide<class_CharacterBody3D_method_move_and_slide>` is generally
  slower than in Godot Physics, due to :ref:`class_CharacterBody3D`::_snap_on_floor(PR NOTE: Apply_floor_snap?)
  triggering on every call.
- :ref:`class_CharacterBody3D` will not report wall collisions unless you're moving towards them.

> It's not clear to me how to fix these issues, but I suspect they will require

Reviewer 3: Do we want to use 'I' in documentation?

Reviewer: Same as the previous comment. This entire section should be removed in my opinion.

Ghost collisions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt employs two techniques to mitigate ghost collisions, meaning collisions with
internal edges of shapes/bodies.

The first technique, called "active edge detection", marks edges of triangles in
:ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` or :ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D` as either "active" or "inactive", based on
the angle to the neighboring triangle. When a collision happens with an inactive
edge the collision normal will be replaced with the triangle's normal instead, to
lessen the effect of ghost collisions.

The angle threshold for this active edge detection is configurable through the
project setting :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/active_edge_threshold<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/collisions/active_edge_threshold>`.

The second technique, called "enhanced internal edge removal", instead adds runtime
checks to detect whether an edge is active or inactive, based on the contact points
of the two bodies. This has the benefit of applying not only to collisions with
:ref:`class_ConcavePolygonShape3D` and :ref:`class_HeightMapShape3D`, but also edges between any shapes within

> the same body.

Reviewer 3: This is an important point and good to stress: If you want to avoid ghost collisions, make sure to group multiple shapes within the same body. It does not work if an object is sliding over the boundary between two static bodies.

Enhanced internal edge removal can be toggled on and off for the various contexts to
which it's applied, using the ``physics/jolt_physics_3d/*/use_enhanced_internal_edge_removal``
project settings.

Memory usage
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt uses a stack allocator for temporary allocations within its simulation step.
This stack allocator requires allocating a set amount of memory up front, which can
be configured using the :ref:`physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size<class_ProjectSettings_property_physics/jolt_physics_3d/limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size>`
project setting.

Jolt also makes use of aligned allocations for some of its memory usage, which it
acquires through function pointers that the implementer assigns. Aligned allocations
were recently added to Godot in the form of ``Memory::alloc_aligned_static``,

> ``Memory::realloc_aligned_static`` and ``Memory::free_aligned_static``, which have all been

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
``Memory::realloc_aligned_static``, and ``Memory::free_aligned_static``, which have all been
```

- ``kinematics/recovery_amount`` is now ``motion_queries/recovery_amount.``
- ``queries/use_legacy_ray_casting`` has been removed.
- ``solver/position_iterations`` is now ``simulation/position_steps.``
- ``solver/velocity_iterations`` is now ``simulation/velocity_steps.``
- ``solver/position_correction`` is now ``simulation/baumgarte_stabilization_factor``,
  but expressed as a fraction instead of a percentage.
- ``solver/active_edge_threshold`` is now ``collisions/active_edge_threshold.``
- ``solver/bounce_velocity_threshold`` is now ``simulation/bounce_velocity_threshold.``
- ``solver/contact_speculative_distance`` is now ``simulation/speculative_contact_distance.``
- ``solver/contact_allowed_penetration`` is now ``simulation/penetration_slop.``
- ``limits/max_angular_velocity`` is now stored as radians instead.
- ``limits/max_temporary_memory`` is now ``limits/temporary_memory_buffer_size.``

There might be some discussion to be had with regards to migrating the settings
values for projects who have previously been relying on the extension.

Joint Nodes
~~~~~~~~~~~

The joint nodes that are exposed in the Godot Jolt extension (JoltPinJoint3D,

> JoltHingeJoint3D, JoltSliderJoint3D, JoltConeTwistJoint3D and JoltGeneric6DOFJoint)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
JoltHingeJoint3D, JoltSliderJoint3D, JoltConeTwistJoint3D, and JoltGeneric6DOFJoint)
```

have not been included with this module.

Thread Safety
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Unlike the Godot Jolt extension, this module does have experimental thread-safety,
including support for the :ref:`physics/3d/run_on_separate_thread<class_ProjectSettings_Property_physics/3d/run_on_separate_thread>`
project setting. This is achieved by utilizing the same wrapper server that's used
by Godot Physics, called ``PhysicsServer3DWrapMT``, as well as introducing a mutex
around the rebuilding of shapes, since concurrent shape-casts could otherwise
trigger a race condition.

This has however not been tested very thoroughly, so should be considered
experimental.

> Query Performance

Reviewer 3: I think this has been fixed by https://github.com/godotengine/godot/pull/101071 so this section can probably be removed.

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Godot Jolt extension utilizes a custom container (typically referred to as an
"inline vector" or "small vector") in order to avoid heap allocations for physics
queries that return more than a single hit, meaning :ref:`intersect_point<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_intersect_point>`,
:ref:`intersect_shape<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_intersect_shape>`,
:ref:`collide_shape<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_collide_shape>`,
:ref:`get_rest_info<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_get_rest_info>`,
:ref:`cast_motion<class_PhysicsDirectSpaceState3D_method_cast_motion>`,
:ref:`body_test_motion<class_PhysicsServer3D_method_body_test_motion>`,

> :ref:`test_move<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_test_move>`, :ref:`move_and_collide<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_move_and_collide>`

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
:ref:`test_move<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_test_move>`, :ref:`move_and_collide<class_PhysicsBody3D_method_move_and_collide>`,
```

For the built-in module ``JPH::Array`` is used for the query collectors instead, which
means that these queries will now always allocate on the heap, likely making them
noticeably slower.

It should be trivial to make some bespoke container for the query collectors that
behaves like an inline/small vector.

Debug Renderer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt provides an interface called ``JPH::DebugRenderer`` for rendering its view of
the physics simulation. In the Godot Jolt extension this is exposed as a custom
:ref:`class_GeometryInstance3D` node called ``JoltDebugGeometry3D``, a different
approach will be used for the built-in module, and for now it is omitted.

Debug snapshots
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Godot Jolt extension has the ability to generate what Jolt refers to as
"snapshots", where it serializes the state of the physics simulation to a file.
These can then be loaded in Jolt's own Samples application, to debug issues more
closely there, without needing to deal with Godot itself, which has proved to be
quite useful when reporting issues upstream to Jolt.

The code for this is technically included with this module, and can be found as

> ``JoltPhysicsServer3D::dump_debug_snapshots``, but it is currently unexposed for now.

Reviewer 3: remove 'for now' as it says the same thing twice.

Reviewer: See [my comment](https://github.com/godotengine/godot-docs/pull/10526#issuecomment-2664160981) below. This entire section should be removed in my opinion.

means that these queries will now always allocate on the heap, likely making them
noticeably slower.

It should be trivial to make some bespoke container for the query collectors that
behaves like an inline/small vector.

Debug Renderer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Jolt provides an interface called ``JPH::DebugRenderer`` for rendering its view of
the physics simulation. In the Godot Jolt extension this is exposed as a custom
:ref:`class_GeometryInstance3D` node called ``JoltDebugGeometry3D``, a different
approach will be used for the built-in module, and for now it is omitted.

Debug snapshots
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The Godot Jolt extension has the ability to generate what Jolt refers to as
"snapshots", where it serializes the state of the physics simulation to a file.
These can then be loaded in Jolt's own Samples application, to debug issues more
closely there, without needing to deal with Godot itself, which has proved to be
quite useful when reporting issues upstream to Jolt.

The code for this is technically included with this module, and can be found as
``JoltPhysicsServer3D::dump_debug_snapshots``, but it is currently unexposed for now.

> Roadmap

Reviewer 5: I would strike this whole section, it feels out of place with other docs - the docs are generally not a place to talk about future plans, and we don't use it for roadmaps for other teams AFAIK.

The whole future being experimental is fair, but IMO some other place (a blog post? the original PR?) are a better time capsule to capture the current state of what is in, what is going to be in, and what won't be in than the docs.
